Bilbo celebrates his 111th birthday and leaves the Shire, leaving the Ring to Frodo Baggins, his cousin and heir. Neither hobbit is aware of the Ring's nature, but the wizard Gandalf realises that it is a Ring of Power. Seventeen years later, Gandalf tells Frodo that he has confirmed that the Ring is the one lost by the Dark Lord Sauron long ago and counsels him to take it away from the Shire.[T 4] Gandalf leaves, promising to return by Frodo's birthday and accompany him on his journey, but fails to do so. Frodo sets out on foot, ostensibly moving to his new home in Crickhollow, accompanied by his gardener, Sam Gamgee, and his cousin, Pippin Took. They are pursued by mysterious Black Riders, but meet a passing group of Elves and spend the night with them. The next day they take a short cut to avoid the Riders, and arrive at the farm of Farmer Maggot. He takes them to Bucklebury Ferry, where they meet their friend Merry Brandybuck who was looking for them. When they reach the house at Crickhollow, Merry and Pippin reveal they know about the Ring and insist on travelling with Frodo and Sam. They decide to shake off the Black Riders by cutting through the Old Forest. Merry and Pippin are trapped by Old Man Willow, an evil tree who controls much of the forest, but are rescued by the mysterious Tom Bombadil. Leaving, they are caught by a barrow-wight, who traps them in a barrow on the downs. Frodo, awakening from the barrow-wight's spell, manages to call Bombadil, who frees them, and equips them with ancient swords from the barrow-wight's hoard.

The hobbits reach the village of Bree, where they encounter a Ranger named Strider. The innkeeper gives Frodo a letter from Gandalf written three months before which identifies Strider as a friend. Strider leads the hobbits into the wilderness after another close escape from the Black Riders, who they now know to be the Nazgûl, who are Ringwraiths, servants of Sauron. On the hill of Weathertop, they are again attacked by the Nazgûl, who wound Frodo with a cursed blade. Strider fights them off and leads the hobbits towards the Elven refuge of Rivendell. Frodo falls deathly ill; Strider finds the only herb, Athelas, that can save him, and treats him with it, yet he is not fully recovered. The Nazgûl nearly capture Frodo at the Ford of Bruinen, but flood waters summoned by Elrond, master of Rivendell, rise up and overwhelm them.